---
layout: post
title: iFrames - The good, the bad and the ugly
category: blog
---
Frequently I got asked about the security considerations 
regarding iframes - so I decided to write up my opinion 
on them. When you search for "iframe" and "security" 
you'll find quite a lot of links dealing with possible 
usage of iframes in attack vectors. Many interesting 
things are possible this way. Starting from injection 
content, sending requests across domain boundaries or 
even port scanning the adjacent lan via CSS or JAVASCRIPT. 
You may find more information on this here.


In the following sections I will use the following terms 
repeatedly. Therefore it's time to define them now:
Parent: It describes the main site that includes one or 
more iframes. It is assumed that you control this site


Guest:
------
It describes the include site which is rendered inside 
an iframe within the parent. There may be on or more 
guests to one parent.


Cross Domain:
-------------
Such an scenario is always valid when the source ("src") 
argument of the iframe points to an other domain than 
the parent. This is for example the case when you include 
3rd-Party-Adds in your Parent.


LAN:
----
Here I am talking about your internal network 
access through the web-server hosting your parent-site.

Cross Domain Attacks (GUEST -> PARENT):
---------------------------------------
This leaves us with the impression that "iframes" are 
evil and dangerous things. However, this does not need 
to be the case. Depending to what extend you're able 
control the content of an iframe it may be considered 
as "harmless" - and I am well aware that there is no 
such thing as "harmless" :)


Mozilla published a well written summary on 
"how to use iframes securely". Especially as long as 
you stick to enforcing the same origin policy 
(X-Frame Headers) and ensure that no iframe is 
included in the "guest"-iframe the sources the 
parent-domain you will minimize cross domain attacks.

Cross Domain Attacks (PARENT -> GUEST):
---------------------------------------
So far we considered the situation when the included 
iframe was evil. However, assuming that an attacker 
is able to inject javascript, css or html (XSS / CSRF) 
into the parent site, she will be able to access the 
guest. The access may be granted either through direct 
DOM access or via an guest-iframe within the guest 
pointing to the parent's domain. Especially the later 
is commonly used in modern AJAX Web Applications to 
avoid the "Same Origin Policy" and therefore to 
establish cross domain communication. Just think about 
portals and mash-ups. Besides you do not actually need 
to access the guest directly - have you considered 
registering a key-stroke-logger with the main browser 
window?

SSL vs. NON-SSL:
----------------
And this brings us to the good old question about SSL. 
Regardless of the flaws included in SSL/TLS it is not 
a wise idea to include http-guests in an https-parent
 or the other way round. By combining a non-ssl and an 
ssl-protected element you reduce the overall security 
to "http" - which is NONE! So? Stay away from it and 
use either http- or https-only combinations.

HTML5 - Sandbox:
----------------
A modern browser includes what's called the HTML5-Sandbox. 
This feature allows you to restrict what an iframe can do, 
or better what can be done within an iframe by simply adding 
an additional attribute to the iframe-tag. This attribute 
is called "sandbox" and can have one or more of the 
following values:

* allow-forms: Do you want to allow form-posts from the guest?
* allow-scripts: Do you want the guest to execute scripts?
* allow-same-origin: When using the sandbox guest have no access to the parent-dom, unless you activate allow-same-origin. Then guest coming from the same-domain as the parent can access the parent-dom.
* allow-top-navigation: Do you want the guest to be able to replace the parent content completely?
* ms-allow-popups: Do you want the guest to be able to open popup windows?

An Example may look like this: 
```html
<iframe sandbox="allow-forms allow-same-origin"/>
```


Summary:
--------
What to do when you have to use iframes and want to 
make it as secure as possible?

* Check the guest and the parent for persistent and reflective XSS/CSRF attacks
* Stick to transporting all content either via http or via https
* Use strickt sandbox rules
