---
layout: post
title: Privacy - What is it and who is responsible for it?
category: blog
---

What is privacy and where does our need for it come from?  
To answer that question we need to go way back in history. 
In the [medieval times]({ http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/medieval_peasants.htm }) 
there has been no privacy for you unless you were rich. 
This statement seems bold, but consider the way people 
lived in those days. Families were uniting several generations 
under one roof and on extremely little space. Often 
they shared one bed - all together. In case you were 
rich at that time life was easier. You would have more 
space and quite some separation from the common folks. 
On the other hand you needed to protect your money. 
This is as well reflected by the movement of justifying 
ones position as given by God. However during the enlightenment 
area that changed. And the French Revolution took the monarch's head.
A good description of those days is given by Charles Dickens in 
["A Tale of Two Cities"]({http://www.amazon.com/Tale-Cities-Dover-Thrift-Editions/dp/0486406512})


Let's jump into life as it is today. How much privacy 
do we feel needing? In a world where we replaced phone 
booths with cell phones it is nearly impossible to not 
listen to a stranger's conversation. Most people seem 
to be fine with that. They even use an extra loud voice 
to let us participate in their lives. Other try to 
protect their words by hiding their mouth with one hand 
while the other one holds the cell phone. If lip reading 
such a threat to you - so why do have this conversation 
in public? 
There's a quite similar behavior when it comes to instant 
messaging and shoulder surfing. Especially in public 
transportation it gets really hard to protect what you're 
writing to whom. But we can't wait and text away anyway. 
Hmm, all that looks like a misguided understanding of privacy.


When do you need privacy? In most cases you like to keep 
things private that would otherwise have a negative impact 
on your life or career. In today's world this may be deceases, 
sexual preferences, financial status, drug addiction and so on. 
Do these things really need to be protected - or would we be 
better of by legalizing and de-tabooing them? Although these 
two approaches may not be as applicable to the digital world 
as they seem at they seem. Currently most privacy decisions 
in the digital world are forced onto the user or customer. 
But, as pointed out above, these people may not be willing 
or be able to make a proper decision. 


But getting to the real dilemma first: How much privacy do 
we really need? Unfortunately the answer to this question 
does not only depend on us. It is also determined by our 
environment like family, friends, neighbors or the government 
that rules the country we live in. Two years ago, as the 
Snowden leak became public everyone was very upset about 
the secret services recording nearly every imaginable 
private moment of your life just to prevent a possible 
terrorist attack. OK, and what got prevented? Think about 
the shooting in Denmark this year. Now many European 
politicians scream for more surveillance and way less 
privacy for everyone. So far it is only surveillance. 
But the consequence of more transparency into everyone's 
daily life could also be that certain hobbies or behaviors 
get labeled hostile and people practicing these will be 
imprisoned. Think about it, this is just one example...


Well, this also raises the question if privacy belongs 
into it-security. According to [Forrester]({https://www.forrester.com/CISOs+Need+To+Add+Customer+Obsession+To+Their+Job+Description/fulltext/-/E-RES115942}) privacy 
becomes more and more part of the daily business of 
it-security professionals. I don't align with Forrester 
on this. It is not the responsibility of the IT-Sec 
professional to make sure every John Doe is safe and 
secure online by removing software bugs as well as 
possible misuse cases. Imagine as a telecommunications 
provider you could offer a very limited access to the 
internet for a high price because you would ban all 
/bin/bash: 9: command not found
on. But does this protect your customers against social 
engineering? Does this really solve the privacy issue? 


One final question remains: What will happen in the 
future? Assuming everyone is responsible for her own
privacy. Will the society split into two groups - one 
with the knowledge and sensitivity for their personal
privacy and doing everything to protect it while the other
remains transparent and unable / unwilling to do the same?
This means back to medieval times? - Let me know what you think!

